---
title: CP3108A
subtitle: Independent Work for Source Academy
mcs: 2
date: 2025-05-22
prev:
  text: CS1101S
  link: /modrevs/AY2425S1/cs1101s
---

At the end of [CS1101S](https://nusmods.com/courses/CS1101S/programming-methodology),
students were asked to apply for this module, where they would be assigned a partner
and a project to improve the Source Academy system. I just had to fill up a short online
form, where I had to list my experiences with various technologies.
A few weeks later, I got an email informing me of my acceptance into the module.

The module itself is CS/CU, and students are expected to put in
5 hours a week to obtain the 2MCs for this module.
However, we were also given the option to put in 10 hours a week,
where we will then be enrolled in CP3108B the next semester to gain an extra 2MCs.
I was told this was done because in previous iterations of this module,
some pairs would do the bare minimum and still get 4MCs for their work.

I applied for this module, wanting to work on my own project
to implement a [Language Server](https://microsoft.github.io/language-server-protocol/) for Source,
as the editor for Source on the Source Academy platform was very bare-bones.
Instead, I was assigned to work on a [VSCode plugin](https://github.com/source-academy/vscode) for Source Academy,
so that students can use the Source Academy platform inside of VSCode.
This plugin was already being developed by a student for his final year project,
and luckily, this plugin was in need of an LSP!

## Learning about Source Academy

The first week of two into the semester, I was trying to understand
the whole Source Academy system, which was much bigger than I expected.
There is

* [js-slang](https://github.com/source-academy/js-slang), the main implementation of Source and its variants
* [modules](https://github.com/source-academy/modules), implementation of various modules available in source
* [frontend](https://github.com/source-academy/frontend) and [backend](https://github.com/source-academy/backend), for the Source Academy website.

For my project I initially imported from js-slang to implement some editor features,
but eventually decoupled js-slang from my project as it caused some issues when
used within the Electron environment in VSCode

## Weekly meetings

Every week I had meetings with Prof Martin Henz who mentored my project
along with Hui Zhang, the creator of the VSCode plugin.
These meetings helped me learn more about the Source Academy system,
and kept me on track so that I would implement some feature every week.
These meetings were very chill and were just to keep prof up to date with
our project, and for him to give us advice as well.

## STePS

Every CP3108 project was submitted to be showcased at the SoC Term Project Showcase (STePS).
We had to make a poster about our project and I felt it was a nice way to wrap it up,
as I got to talk about my project that I had spent many hours on to other students and profs
working on the Source Academy system.

## Conclusion

This module was my most time consuming one in my first year of NUS.
I committed to spending 10 hours a week on my project, even though
I didn't really have to, but I was passionate about developing a
better tool for NUS students as well as learning more about how LSPs
actually work. In the end I would say it was worth it and I managed
to develop a functioning LSP that comes with most modern editor features.
I will continue working on it throughout the summer break, so that
it can be used by future CS1101S students.
I will talk about my LSP in a future blog post, but for now you can
still view the source code [here](https://github.com/source-academy/source-lsp).
