---
title: CS2100
subtitle: Computer Organisation
mcs: 4
---

Profs: Wong Weng-Fai, Anandha Gopalan, Aaron Tan

CS2100 dives into the inner workings of a computer, where you learn how pointers
in C works, how logic gates make up logic devices and memory units, and how a
simplified MIPS instruction set is implemented in the hardware.

There are 4 main topics in this module:

1. C: Structs, Arrays, Pointers, 2s Complement, IEEE754
2. MIPS: Instructions, Encoding, Datapath
3. Logic gates: KMaps, Logic circuits, MSI components, Flip flops
4. CPU optimizations: Pipelining, Cache

The lectures were all pre recorded, and most lectures were more than 2 hours in
length, so I would really advise not watching them unless the slides are not
clear. There is also a weekly reflection, I have no idea what goes on in there
as I have not attended a single one. There are also weekly tutorials and labs,
for which attendance is compulsory. Most labs can be done before the actual lab
session, in the form of a lab sheet that usually just takes a few minutes, there
are only 3? labs where you need to assemble a circuit in person in 1 hour and I
found those pretty fun.

## Personal opinion

Everything about this module just feels bad. Many parts of the lecture content
feels outdated, I echo the sentiments of many others that we should be learning
a simplified RISC-V instructed set rather than MIPS. I feel like there should
not be so much emphasis on manually encoding MIPS instructions and calculating
2s complement arithmetic in the assessments. (I believe you can hit median for
the midterms just purely from being a human computer.)

The learning experience just felt like having to accept whatever arbitrary
convention the profs decided on 10 years ago. Fortunately I am quite good at
turning my brain off and regurgitating lecture material, but it really felt like
I did not learn much. I would say the only things I have learned that is also
beneficial for future modules would be datapath, pipelining and cache (aka all
the hardware stuff).

After reading week, I stopped reading lecture slides and attending tutorials,
and just crammed the lecture contents in a few days of studying before the
finals. Evidently it worked well allowed me to allocate more time to other more
important modules.

Workload: 7/10 \
I would say I spent most of my revision time on this module, usually pulling 12
hours days at home or at COM1.

Enjoyability: 2/10

Difficulty: 4/10 \
One thing the prof gets right is that this is not a difficult module, there's
just so much lecture content.

## Grade breakdown

| Assessment          | Marks      | LQ    | Med   | UQ     | Actual     |
| ------------------- | ---------- | ----- | ----- | ------ | ---------- |
| Tutorial Attendance | 16/20      | 20    | 20    | 20     | 4/5%       |
| Labs                | 163.5/185  | 180.5 | 183.5 | 184.88 | 7.07/8%    |
| Finals              | 107.84/109 | -     | -     | -      | 1.98/2%    |
| Assignment 1        | 30.5/37    | -     | -     | -      | 2.72/3.33% |
| Assignment 2        | 40/40      | 37.5  | 40    | 40     | 3.33/3.33% |
| Assignment 3        | 40/40      | 40    | 40    | 40     | 3.33/3.33% |
| Midterm             | 34/40      | 24    | 28    | 32     | 21.25/25%  |
| Final               | 92/100     | -     | 73    | -      | 45/50%     |
| Total               | -          | -     | -     | -      | 88.71/100% |

Excepted grade: A-/A <br/> Final grade: TBA
