---
title: CS2104
subtitle: Programming Language Concepts
mcs: 4
---

Prof: Olivier Danvy

CS2104 is a module intended to teach students about various concepts in
programming languages. The original plan was to cover Chez Scheme, then Schelog,
then OCaml, then Gallina. However because this is the prof's first semester
teaching this module, the pacing did not go as planned and we only touched Chez
Scheme for the whole semester.

The lecture notes for this semester is
[online here](https://delimited-continuation.github.io/CS2104/2025-2026_Sem1/index.html),
which covers[^Disclaimer]:

[^Disclaimer]:
    Disclaimer: I did not attend many lectures so my understanding of what was
    actually taught in the lectures is not the best.

1. Introduction to Scheme, including Backus Naur Forms and Proof Trees
2. Recursion without self reference
3. Unit tests in Scheme
4. Lists in Scheme, including detecting cyclic lists, and trees represented
   using lists
5. Regular expressions in Scheme
6. Evaluation order (Call by value vs name vs need)

The lectures were conducted in person with no recording and unfortunately Prof
Danvy's accent makes it hard to understand him at times. The tutorials are also
conducted by Prof Danvy, and was basically just used as an extra 2 hour lecture
slot.

Some weeks required hand-ins that are written in LaTeX, and were mostly simple
coding exercises. The hand-ins are done as a group of 9-10 people, which felt
way too large and you can prob just join a random group and ghost throughout the
whole semester.

The midterm project was a self applicable syntax checker written in Scheme, also
to be done as a group. The final exam was an open book, non secure, 61 MCQ
examplify paper, most of the questions were about behaviours of given
expressions in Scheme, which we can just run on our own laptop to test it out.

## Personal opinion

This was certainly the weirdest mod I have taken. It felt like an intro to
computer science module done in Scheme, which is not surprising given that Prof
Danvy taught such a module back when Yale NUS was a thing.

The first 2 weeks really felt like a waste of time, Prof Danvy spent most of the
lessons talking about clarity, self reference, and pleonasms. The lecture notes
for these 2 weeks were reused from YSC1212, and I really encourage you to read
[this](https://delimited-continuation.github.io/YSC1212/2022-2023_Sem2/week-01_recap.html#)
to really understand how this module is conducted. I understand that self
reference is an important concept in programming languages, and the prof wants
us to reflect on how self reference works and why its allowed in PLs, but is it
really necessary to spend 2 lessons on this?

The next few weeks weren't really any better, where prof spent many hours going
through the syntax and behaviour of expressions in Scheme. I really felt this
wasn't needed, as I learnt most of it myself by just scrolling through the
Scheme reference. Prof should have just expected some level of background and
spend one lecture going through any peculiarities of Scheme, before moving on to
more interesting concepts, which would have certainly helped with the pacing.

I also felt that lectures were pretty dry and boring, which resulted in me not
attending any more lectures past reading week. Prof Danvy basically spends the
lecture using Emacs to run code snippets and talk about what these snippets do.
Maybe it is because I already know most of these concepts, but I feel like they
are way too simple for a level 2000 CS module, and I hope the prof can make it
"harder" for future iterations.

I would say the only fun I had in this semester was for the
[exercises in week 12](https://delimited-continuation.github.io/CS2104/2025-2026_Sem1/week-12_compiled-regular-expressions.html),
where we were asked to compile regular expressions into scheme by chaining if
and let expressions. I felt this was pretty lame, and used what I learnt from
[CS3231](./cs3231.md) and wrote
[a program](https://github.com/mug1wara26/Scheme-Regex-Compiler) to compile
regular expressions into Non-Deterministic Finite Automata, which then gets
interpreted to match against input strings.

Lastly, more time needs to be dedicated to admin, Lecture notes are not updated
regularly (we didn't even have lecture notes in the first few weeks) and my
group still does not know our grade for the first 3 hand-ins. One of those
hand-ins is even marked as 0/20 which the prof has not resolved, because of this
I can not give a grade breakdown and can't estimate my grade for this module.
(Update: The marks were released on 15th December)

Workload: 4/10 \
The weekly hand-ins required a lot of writing to explain the purpose of the
exercise, how we solved the exercise, and our conclusion for solving the
exercise, this constituted most of the workload.

Enjoyability: 2/10 \
I was hoping to learn more interesting concepts.

Difficulty: 2/10

P.S. I hope this didn't come off as too harsh on Prof Danvy, this is his first
time teaching CS2104 so some hiccups are expected, and I have heard good things
about his other mod
[CS3234](https://nusmods.com/courses/CS3234/logic-for-proofs-and-programs).

## Grade breakdown

\[individual] final exam (multiple-choice questions): 25% \
\[group] weekly handins before the midterm project: 20% \
\[group work but individuated grade] midterm project: 25% \
\[group] weekly handins after the midterm project: 20% \
\[individual] participation: 10%

| Assessment      | Marks  | Low | LQ  | Med | UQ  | High | Actual     |
| --------------- | ------ | --- | --- | --- | --- | ---- | ---------- |
| Week 02         | 18/20  | 18  | 18  | 18  | 18  | 18   | 6/6.67%    |
| Week 03         | 19/20  | 19  | 19  | 19  | 19  | 20   | 6.33/6.67% |
| Week 04         | 19/20  | 0   | 19  | 19  | 19  | 20   | 6.33/6.67% |
| Midterm Project | 90/100 | 60  | 80  | 85  | 88  | 90   | 22.5/25%   |
| Week 11 & 12    | 19/20  | 0   | 14  | 15  | 19  | 20   | 19/20%     |
| Final Exam      | 48/61  | 19  | 37  | 42  | 47  | 55   | 19.67/25%  |

Excepted grade: ¯\\\_(ツ)\_/¯ \
Final grade: A
