---
title: CS3231
subtitle: Theory of Computation
mcs: 4
---

CS3231 is a challenging theoretical module that introduces topics from theory of
computation. The notes and tutorials are all on the
[course website](https://www.comp.nus.edu.sg/~sanjay/cs3231.html), and I have
published [my own notes](./cs3231/main.pdf) that cover every topic, these notes
are more comprehensive than the slides since the slides lack a lot of details
that the professor only covers during the lectures.

This module had 3 main topics:

1. Regular languages
2. Context free languages
3. Turing machines and complexity

Each topic introduces a model of computation, and we spend a few weeks studying
their definitions, their limits, and their properties.

This was the best module I have taken in NUS so far. I looked forward to weekly
lectures and tutorials as the theory in this module felt really interesting and
fun. The lecturer, Prof Sanjay, is clearly passionate about the topic which
makes his lectures really engaging. The slides are not very detailed because he
doesn't just read off the slides, but explains each topic while drawing diagrams
on the whiteboard. The only TA, Ivan Koswara, marks tutorials for the whole
class (60 students) every week, while at the same time answering questions on
the discord and providing a substantial amount of practice question before each
assessment.

I **strongly** recommend every CS student to take this module. Given that we
work with computers, shouldn't we know the limits that of what our devices can
do? After taking this module, I have a better understanding of how RegExs work,
how different parsers can be designed for context free grammars, what Turing
Machines actually are and their many equivalent forms of computation, and what
NP completeness actually means and how to prove problems are NP hard.

I will warn that the bell curve for this module is definitely tough, given that
this is not a compulsory module. However there is a midterm that occurs before
reading week, and the professor marks the paper in 1 day, so you can drop the
mod before reading week if your midterm 1 score is bad. The prof is also very
lenient in his marking, and brushes off minor mistakes as long as you know what
you are doing. If you study and absorb the lecture material every week, you are
sure to do well in this module.

### Grade breakdown

The way tutorial participation was graded is as follows:

- Each time you present gives you 1 mark (capped at 4)
- Each tutorial attended gives you 0.25 marks
- Each tutorial submission gives you 0.25 marks

This sums up to 10, and your final score is rounded up to the nearest integer.
That means you can miss a total of 3 submissions/attendance and still get the
full participation mark.

| Assessment             | Marks  | LQ  | Med  | UQ   |
| ---------------------- | ------ | --- | ---- | ---- |
| Tutorial Participation | 9/10   | 9   | 10   | 10   |
| Midterm 1              | 21/25  | 12  | 15.5 | 21   |
| Midterm 2              | 25/25  | 14  | 19   | 22.5 |
| Finals                 | 26/40  | -   | -    | -    |
| Total                  | 81/100 | -   | -    | -    |

Excepted grade: B+/A- \
Final grade: TBA
